Magnetic Interactions of Wigner Crystal in Magnetic Field and Berry Curvature:
Multi-Particle Tunneling through Complex Trajectories
Kim∗ Kyung-Su
Department of Physics and Anthony J. Leggett Institute for Condensed Matter Theory,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 1110 West Green Street, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA
(Dated: August 19, 2025)
B We study how a weak perpendicular magnetic field and a Berry curvature Ωmodify the magnetic
interactions of a two-dimensional Wigner crystal (WC), using the semi-classical large-rs expansion.
When only a magnetic field is present, various ring-exchange interactions arise from electron tunneling
2025
along complex trajectories, which constitute complex instanton solutions of the coordinate-space
B, path integral. To leading order in each ring-exchange constant acquires an Aharonov-Bohm (AB)
phase equal to the magnetic flux enclosed by the real tunneling trajectory of the = 0 problem. B
≪1). g-factor (g This effect is directly relevant to two-dimensional electron systems with a small In
Aug the presence of a Berry curvature, multi-particle tunneling must be considered in a (complexified)
(r, k). phase space To leading order in Ω, the exchange constants acquire the Berry phase enclosed
by a purely imaginary trajectory in a momentum space. Finally, when both and Ωare non-zero, B
in addition to having the AB and Berry phase factors, the magnitude of the exchange constant can
18 also be renormalized by an effective-mass correction. These effects may be relevant for the WC and
its proximate phases recently observed in tetra- and penta-layer rhombohedral graphene.
[cond-mat.mes-hall]
Pa na-particle The two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG), a system of where refers to an exchange that permutes
(3) spins in each polygon in in a counter-clockwise direc- Coulomb-interacting electrons confined in two dimensions,
(−1)Pa (−1)na+1 tion and = is the sign of the permuta-
e2 p2 1
X X i ˆPa + −rj|, (1) H0 =
Pa, tion. is the permutation operator for which could
|ri 2m 4πϵ
in turn be expressed in terms of as in (25-28). is Si Ja i<j i
the exchange constant for that is in general complex Pa is described by a dimensionless parameter characterizing
when the magnetic field (B) or Berry curvature (Ω) is the ratio of the interaction energy to the kinetic energy
(J∗ B present is the complex conjugate). When = Ω= 0,
a e2/8πϵr0
large-rs [11–13, 16] the semi-classical approximation gives rs = = r0/aB. (2)
ℏ2/2mr2
0
1/√πn s
A(0) ˜S(0) e2 = is the average interparticle distance (for an r0
e−√rs ˜S(0)
a a ≡J(0)
= , Ja(B = 0, Ω= 0) a 4πϵℏ2/me2
electron density n) and = is the effective aB a r5/4 4πϵaB 2π
s Bohr radius. The 2DEG forms a Fermi liquid (FL) in
(4)
≪1) (rs the weak-coupling regime and a Wigner crystal
arXiv:2508.13149v1
≫1 (WC) in the strong-coupling regime rs [1–4]. [5] A(0) ˜S(0)
where and are, respectively, the (normalized)
a a
The magnetism within each such phase of the 2DEG is
action and the fluctuation determinant shown in Table I.
an interesting and subtle problem that has attracted long-
How does the presence of a uniform out-of-plane mag-
standing attention [2–4, 6, 7]. In particular, in the WC
netic field and a Berry curvature Ωaffect these ring- B
phase, the magnetism is determined by various multi-spin
exchange interactions? We address this question in the
[8–15] [16] ring-exchange processes (See Ref. for the most
2DEG system in the presence of a uniform and/or Ω, B
recent investigation). The effective spin Hamiltonian is
where the Berry curvature is thought to be derived from
written as a sum over various ring-exchange interactions:
some parent band [17]. Throughout this paper, we con-
≪1) g (g sider a system with a small effective factor and ˆPa X (−1)Pa − Heff = Ja
ignore the Zeeman splitting. We derive the formula for
a
the exchange constants Ja using the asymptotic large-rs
ˆP2 ˆP−1 ˆP3 ˆP−1 X X J∗ J∗ − = (J2 + (J3 + ) ) (3)
2 3 expansion (i.e., deep in the WC phase) for three cases: (i) 2 3
̸= Ω̸= ̸= 0 and Ω= 0; (ii) = 0 and 0; and (iii) 0 B B B
Ω̸= and 0. We summarize our main results as follows. ˆP4 ˆP−1 ˆP5 ˆP−1
X X J∗ J∗ − (J4 + (J5 + + ) )
4 5 4 5 (i) When only the (uniform) magnetic field is present,
we solve the multi-particle tunneling problem in the large-
rs limit at a fixed “Landau-level filling factor” ˆP6 ˆP−1 ˆP6 ˆP−1 X X J∗ (J′ J′∗
· · · (J6 + ) + + ) + , +
6 6 6 6 6
2πl2 2(lB/r0)2 ≡n · ν = = O(1), (5)
B
ℏ/eB p ≡ where is the magnetic length. We assume lB
(ν√rs)−1
≪1 to be of order 1 and use as a small ν
∗kyungsu@illinois.edu [18]. expansion parameter To leading order, the exchange

2
˜S(0) ˜Σ(r) ˜Σ(k) A(0) Interestingly, since the momentum-space trajectory is Process
a a a a
˜Σ(k) k(0) iImk(0), < purely imaginary at leading order, =
J2 1.63 1.28 1.43 -1.69 a
0 is negative for counter-clockwise motion in a position
J3 1.53 1.18 3.03 -0.73
˜Σ(k) space. is again independent of rs and νΩ(Table I).
J4 1.65 1.32 4.62 -0.57 a
(iii) Finally, when both and Ωare finite, the B
J5 1.90 1.72 6.22 -0.53
Aharonov-Bohm and Berry phases contribute additively
J6 1.79 1.62 10.87 -0.29
J′ 2.11 2.48 7.79 -0.48 J(0) Ω)|ei[ϕa(B)+γa(Ω)]
→Ja(B, |Ja(B, Ω) = (14) 6
a
˜S(0) A(0) with a possible modification of the magnitude of the ex- TABLE I. : Dimensionless action; : fluctuation de-
a a
˜S(0) ˜Σ(r) A(0) change constant. This arises because the orbital magnetic terminant; and enter (4); : dimensionless area
a a a
moment that couples to the magnetic field ˜Σ(k) ˜r(0)(˜τ) (8); enclosed by the real-space trajectory : dimen-
a
sionless area enclosed by (imaginary) momentum-space trajec-
−Mz(k)B ∆H = (15) (0)(˜τ) ˜k
(13). tory These values are obtained from semi-classical
(50)—by trajectories—solutions to discretizing the imaginary
can renormalize the effective band mass,
time into = 50 slices, with = 30, 40, 90 elec- Ntime Nmove ...,
trons allowed to move during the tunneling process, and then
!−1
d2Mz →∞. extrapolating to The details on how the semi- Nmove 1 −B
→m∗= m , (16)
classical trajectory is obtained can be found in Ref. [16]. ℏ2
dk2 m
k=Q0
→r∗ →a∗ which in turn renormalizes and B, rs (2) aB
constants in are modified from their zero-field value (3) s
and hence the tunneling rate by an Aharonov-Bohm phase factor ϕa(B) [19]:
eiϕa(B), J(0) J(0) →Ja(B) (6) = s
e−√ A(0) ˜S(0) a a e2
˜S(0) a a r∗s J(0)
→|Ja(B, Ω)| · = . a
a 4πϵa∗ r∗5/4 2π
−eB −2 B s
˜Σ(r) ℏΣ(r) ϕa(B) = = , (7)
(17) a a
ν
1 Z
r(0) dr(0) ˜Σ(r) X Σ(r) ≡r2 Here, is the crystal momentum at the band bottom Q0 ≡ · × . (8)
a a 0 i,a i,a 2
(which is assumed to be unique) and the effective mass
i
tensor is taken to be isotropic for simplicity.
Σ(r) Here, is the area enclosed by the position-space
a Effects of a magnetic field—We first derive the exchange
r(0) ≡(r(0) r(0) · · · tunneling trajectory (τ) 1,a(τ), N,a(τ)) in ,
interactions of the WC in the presence of a magnetic field, a
the absence of a magnetic field and is positive for counter-
eA(ri)]2 ˜Σ(r) e2 1 [pi + clockwise motion. is the dimensionless area whose
a X X + −rj|, (18) H =
value (shown in Table I) is independent of rs and ν. |ri 2m 4πϵ
i<j i (ii) In the case where only the (uniform) Berry curvature
is present, we solve the problem at large rs for a fixed
B(−y/2, where A(r) = x/2), closely following the analo-
2Ω gous derivation for = 0 (see e.g., Refs. [12, 16]). For B
≡rsνΩ= α = O(1), (9)
a moment, let us consider a single tunneling process Pa a2 Brs
that cyclically permutes electrons at WC sites na Rik
which is assumed to be of order 1. Here we defined the
≡i1) (with spins σk) to Rik+1 (ina+1
“Chern filling factor,”
→ · · · (Rik, σk) (Rik+1, σk), k = 1, , na. (19) 2(lΩ/r0)2
νΩ≡Ω· · 2πn = sgn(Ω) = O (1/rs) , (10)
Pa
p lΩ≡ |Ω|. with the Berry length scale To leading order
The effective Hamiltonian matrix element describing this
1/rs, Ja γa(Ω) in acquires a Berry phase enclosed by the
process is expressed as
k(0)(τ) momentum-space tunneling trajectory at Ω= 0:
⟨Paσ| |σ⟩= −Ja(B), ha (20)
J(0) J(0) eiγa(Ω), →Ja(Ω) = (11)
a a
≡(σ1, · · · σ σ2, , σN) where is a spin configuration whose
α
˜Σ(k) ith component σi is the spin at a WC site Ri and Σ(k) Ω· γa(Ω) = = , (12)
a a 2
1 Z ≡(σP · · · Paσ (1), σP (2), , σP (N)) (21)
k(0) dk(0) X Σ(k) −1 −1 −1 ≡ ×
a a a a i,a i,a
2
i
is the permuted configuration.
1 1 Z
Imk(0) dImk(0) ˜Σ(k) X − × ≡ = . (13)
a i,a i,a 2 aBr0
|σ⟩≡|(Ri, σi)⟩ (22)
i

3
is a shorthand for a state where the site is occupied The propagators on the right-hand side can in turn be Ri
by an electron with a spin σi. In terms of operators [20], represented as a path integral,
˜β)=P ˜R ˜r(
D˜r(˜τ)e−√rs Z † † † X ˜S,
e−βH · · · · · · −Ja fina,σna fi2,σ2fi1,σ1 f ha = i2,σ1f f ⟨Pσ| |σ⟩= (34) δσ,P
i1,σna i3,σ2 σ
˜R ˜r(0)=
{σi}
˜β "X ( ) # ˙˜r2 ˆPa,
−(−1)PaJa 2 Z = (23)
˜S[˜r(˜τ)] −˜V0 ˙˜yi i (˜r) = d˜τ + i ˜xi + V , ν√rs
2
0 i
(35)
† † ˆPa X · · · ≡ fi1,σ1 ina,σna−1fina,σna f f
i1,σna 1
X (˜r) ≡ −˜rj|. (36) V
{σi}
|˜ri
ˆPi1i2 ˆPi2i3 ˆPina−1ina i<j · · · = , (24)
Here, the action is rescaled to make the depen- rs
† dence manifest by introducing the dimensionless coor- f fi,σ where and are, respectively, the electron creation
i,σ
˜r ≡r/r0, dinates, and the dimensionless imaginary time and annihilation operator at a WC site with a spin Ri
(−1)Pa = τEDebye. The corresponding dimensionless inverse ˜τ σ. (23) The sign factor in comes from reordering
˜β ˆPa ≡βEDebye. temperature is The factor in the δσ,P
the fermionic operators. can in turn be expressed in
σ
first line appears because each electron’s spin is conserved terms of spin operators as
≡RP under the dynamics of (18). (PR)i (i). The dot
1 ˙˜xi
ˆPij ≡d˜xi/d˜τ. ˜τ, indicates a derivative with respect to e.g., Si·Sj = 2 + 2, (25)
is the Landau-level filling factor (5). The minimum ν
1 ˜V0
ˆPijk (˜r) (classical) Coulomb energy = correspond- min˜rV Si·Sj Sj·Sk Sk·Si −2iχijk = + + + 4, (26)
ing to the classical WC configuration is subtracted for
≡Si · × χijk Sj Sk, (27) convenience. The long-range Coulomb interaction is V
1 calculated using the standard Ewald method [22].
ˆPijkl · · · · −i = (Si Sj + ) (χijk + χjkl + χkli + χlij)
rs, (34) At large the dominant paths in the path integral 2
are given by small oscillations around the classical WC 1
+ 2 hijkl + 8, (28)
configurations together with instanton events that con-
nect one WC configuration to another via multi-particle
≡(Si · · ↔l) −(j ↔k), hijkl Sj)(Sk Sl) + (j (29)
exchange processes. Since 1/EDebye is the typical size of
1/|Ja| instantons in imaginary time and is the average ˆPijkl
etc. Here, the first term in involves the sum over
distance between them, at most one instanton event can
i, j, k, l all Heisenberg couplings between any two spins in
∆τ (30). occur for the intermediate time scale Therefore,
χijk and is the spin-chirality operator. Summing over all
e−∆τH ha (23), we recover the effective spin Hamiltonian (3). ⟨Paσ| |σ⟩|1-inst
−1 ∼∆τ Ja . (37)
Ja(B) The objective now is to obtain the expression for e−∆τH ⟨σ| |σ⟩|0-inst
→∞limit in the analogously as in the = 0 case rs B
The denominator is evaluated by considering small oscil-
[16]. This is done by first obtaining the asymptotic be-
˜r(˜τ) lation contributions around a WC configuration, =
havior of the off-diagonal and diagonal propagators at an
˜R ˜R] δ˜r(˜τ). + Noting that S[ = 0,
intermediate time scale
√rs i−1/2
h ˜R] e−∆τH
⟨R| |R⟩|0-inst ∼ (38) det M[ ≪∆τ ≪1/|Ja|, 1/EDebye (30)
δ˜r(∆˜τ)=0 −√rs 1 Z Z
≡e2/(4πϵaBr3/2 ˜R]δ˜r(˜τ) 2δ˜r(˜τ)T EDebye where ) sets the zero-point energy Dδ˜r(˜τ) ≡
exp d˜τ M[ ,
s
scale (per particle) of the WC. By projecting to the Hilbert δ˜r(0)=0
space spanned by classical ground-state manifold and
˜S δ2
expanding the exponential in Taylor series [21], ˜R]
≡ Mij[ (39)
δ˜ri(˜τ) δ˜rj(˜τ)
˜R e−∆τH |σ⟩∼|ψ(R)|2e−βE0 ˜r(˜τ)= ⟨σ| (31)
∂2 ∂2V 2i ∂
e−∆τH |σ⟩∼|ψ(R)|2e−βE0∆τJa, ˜R], ⟨Paσ| (32) Eij −δij + [ = +
ν√rs
2 ∂˜τ ∂˜τ ∂˜ri∂˜rj
|ψ(R)|2 |ψ(PaR)|2 where = is the probability density of
  0 1
R E0 cNEDebye electrons occupying the WC sites and =
is the total zero-point energy of the system [c is some −1 0  
O(1) number]. By taking the ratio of the two, we obtain ...
E ≡ . (40)
e−∆τH 0 1 ⟨Paσ| |σ⟩
−1 ∼∆τ Ja |σ⟩. (33)
−1 0 e−∆τH ⟨σ|

4
˜ra(˜τ) (37) Ja The numerator of is obtained from the semi-classical expression for by expanding around the zero-field
1/√rs:
˜R ˜R, ˜r(0) ˜ra(˜τ) P path connecting to together with harmonic solution (˜τ) in powers of
a
˜ra(˜τ) fluctuations about it. Here is the solution to the
1
saddle-point equation of motion of the action (35), ˜r(0) δ˜r(1) r−1
√rs ˜ra(˜τ) = (˜τ) + (˜τ) + O . (49)
a a s
d2˜xi 2 d˜yi
[˜r(˜τ)] −i −∂˜xiV = 0, (41) ν√rs By substituting this in (41, 42), we obtain the real instan-
2 d˜τ d˜τ
ton equation at zeroth order
d2˜yi 2 d˜xi
[˜r(˜τ)] −∂˜yiV + i = 0, (42) ν√rs
d2˜r(0) 2 d˜τ d˜τ
−˜∇V [˜r(0) a (˜τ)] = 0, (50)
a 2 d˜τ
satisfying the boundary condition
˜R ˜R ˜r(0) ˜r(0) ≡ ≡R/r0 subject to (0) = and (∆˜τ) = Pa
a a ˜R ˜R
˜ra(0) ˜ra(∆˜τ) ≡R/r0 ≡PaR/r0. = and = Pa (43) PaR/r0. The first-order equation is
̸= ̸= B 1/ν Note that, when 0 (i.e., 0), no real solution of d2δ˜r(1) d˜r(0)
2i
i,a a,j δ˜r(1) [˜r(0) the above instanton equations exists, forcing us to look for − Eij ∂˜ri∂˜rjV (˜τ)] = , (51)
a a,j 2 d˜τ ν d˜τ
a complex solution. This amounts to a complex instanton
˜Sa ≡˜S[˜ra(˜τ)], saddle of the path integral. Defining
δ˜r(1) δ˜r(1) (∆˜τ) with (0) = 0 and = 0, where the repeated
a a
(51) indices are implicitly summed over. Since is a second- ∼e−√rs
˜Sa× e−∆τH
⟨Paσ| |σ⟩|a,1-inst ˜r(1)
order differential equation for (˜τ)/i with real coeffi-
a √rs
˜R ! ˜r(1) δ˜r(∆˜τ)=P ˜τ
(˜τ) is purely imaginary. cients, Z Z
a d˜τδ˜r(˜τ)T M[˜ra(˜τ)]δ˜r(˜τ) Dδ˜r(˜τ) − exp
r−1/2
We also expand the instanton action in powers of : 2 ˜R
s δ˜r(0)= 0
√rs e−√rs
−1/2 ˜Sa ∆˜τ √rs √rs
M[˜ra(˜τ)] . (44) = det i Z
˜Sa ˙˜ra ˙˜r2 ˜rT ν√rs E = + d˜τ
a a
0
However, this expression diverges due to a zero mode of
√rs 1/√rs i2
˜S(0) ˜Σ(r) M[˜ra(˜τ)] corresponding to the translation of instanton in + + O , (52) =
a a ν
M[˜ra(˜τ)]∂˜τ˜ra(˜τ) an imaginary time: = 0. After properly
∆˜τ 2 Z Z q
regularizing this divergence [16, 23, 24], [˜r(0) ˜S(0) ˙˜r(0) d˜r(0)
= = d˜τ 2V (˜τ)], (53)
a a a a
0
e−∆τH ⟨Par0| |r0⟩|a,1-inst (45)
1 Z
˜r(0) d˜r(0) ˜Σ(r) X × ≡ i,a, (54)
a i,a s 2
˜Sa e2 √rs e−√rs
−1 i ˜Sa det′
M[˜ra(˜τ)] , = ∆τ 2
4πϵaBr3/2 2π
≡˜S[r(0) ˜S(0) s (˜τ)] > where 0 is the instanton action of the
a a
˜Σa = 0 problem and is the signed area (positive for B
where prime in the determinant indicates that the zero
˜r(0) mode contribution is omitted. Using the identity, the counter-clockwise motion) enclosed by (˜τ). The
a
first line in (52) follows from the constant of motion of
√rs !−1 !−1
the zeroth-order instanton equation (50) det′ det′ 2 2 M[˜ra(˜τ)] M[˜ra(˜τ)]
r1/4 = ,
√rs
s ˜R] ˜R]
det M[ det M[ 1 2
˜V0 ˙˜r(0) [˜r(0) −V (˜τ)] + = 0. (55)
a a (46) 2
(52), In the second line of we used the following identity we obtain
Z Z s
˙˜r(0) δ˙˜r(1) δ˙˜r(1) [˜r(0) ˜Sa · d˜τ∇V · e2 d˜τ (˜τ) (˜τ) = (˜τ)] (˜τ)
Aa e−√rs
˜Sa, a a a a
· Ja = (47)
r5/4 4πϵaB 2π
Z Z s
d˜τ¨˜r(0) ˙˜r(0) δ˙˜r(1) δ˜r(1) · − · = = d˜τ = 0, (56)
−1 a a a a det′M[˜ra(˜τ)]
2
Aa = . (48)
˜R] det M[
where the first equality follows from the constant of motion
of the first-order instanton equation (51)
The effective Hamiltonian is then obtained by sum- (3)
ming over all the possible tunneling processes Pa [25] −˜∇V ˙˜r(0) δ˙˜r(1) [˜r(0)(˜τ)] δ˜r(1)
· · = 0, (57)
This expression for applies for any value of as Ja B
(41) (42) long as the complex solutions of and are found (50) the second equality follows from and the third equal-
(which is a complicated task). But since the real instanton ity is obtained by integration by parts. This expression
[≡˜r(0) is zero since the first and the last expression is identical solutions (˜τ)] for the = 0 problem were already B
a
[12, 13, 16], up to a minus sign. obtained we would like to obtain a simplified

5
Due to the imaginary deformation of the instanton path, 1 i Z
−i˜ki· ˜k2 ˜S ˙˜ri ˙˜ri X ν√rs ˜ri × = d˜τ + +
O(r−1/2 i (48)
the fluctuation determinant also acquires a ) 2
s
i
correction relative to its zero-field value:
!
iα 1/√rs ˙˜ki
˜ki −˜V0 A(0) 4√rs (˜r) × − + V . (65)
Aa = + O , (58)
a
−1
  ∂2V ∂2 2 det′ ˜r(0)
−δij (˜τ) + Again, in order to see the dependence manifest, we rs
a 2 ∂˜τ ∂˜ri∂˜rj A(0)
≡ . (59) ˜S
a introduced the normalized action in terms of dimension-  ˜R] ∂2 ∂2V
−δij det [ +
2 ∂˜τ ∂˜ri∂˜rj less coordinates [as defined below (34-36)] and momenta
r0k/√rs. ≡√aBr0
˜k 2Ω/(a2 ≡νΩrs = = Brs) is k α
Collecting the leading contributions, we recover (6-8):
an O(1) parameter introduced to capture the Berry (9)
−2i
νΩ≡Ω· 2πn (10) phase effect, where is the Chern filling ˜Σ(r) J(0)
, (60) Ja(B) = exp
a a ν
factor (analogous to the Landau-level filling factor ν).
With this setup, the exchange constants Ja(B, Ω) can
J(0) where > 0 is the exchange constant at B = 0
a be derived analogously, but with key modifications, from
large-rs the expansion. The saddle-point equations of the s
˜S(0) A(0) e2
e−√rs (65) 4N action yield first-order Hamilton’s equations for ˜S(0)
a a J(0)
· . (61) = a
a ˜k): r5/4 4πϵaB 2π
(˜r, the (complex) phase-space variables
s
α ˙˜k
˜S(0) A(0) Σ(0) −i˜k ˙˜r The values of , and are numerically calcu-
2√rs − E = (66)
a a a
lated and shown in Table I.
2 ˙˜k Effects of a Berry curvature—The previous result in
˙˜r, ν√rs E i∇˜rV − (67) =
a magnetic field (60-61) can be straightforwardly gen-
eralized to include the (uniform) Berry curvature effect.
which result in
The Berry curvature effect on the real-time dynamics
α 2i iα
can be captured by considering a (phase-space) action ¨˜r ˙˜r ˙˜r
ν√rs 2√rs [˜r] [˜r] E E ∇∇V − −∇V 1 + + = 0,
νrs R SM = dtLM, where [26, 27] [28]
(68)
−edri dri
X ℏki −εM(ki) ·A(ri) · LM =
∇∇V where [˜r] is the Hessian matrix of at ˜r. These V
dt dt 1/√rs:
i equations can be solved perturbatively in powers of
e2 dki 1
X 1 · A(ki) − + + V0. (62)
˜r(0) δ˜r(1) r−1 √rs ˜ra(˜τ) . (69) (˜τ) + (˜τ) + O =
|ri −rj| dt 4πϵ
s a a
i<j
1 (0) (1)
B(−y/2, A(k) Ω(−ky/2, A(r) x/2) kx/2), Here, = and = ˜ka(˜τ) ˜k δ˜k r−1
√rs (˜τ) + = (˜τ) + O . (70)
a s a
and as in (35), the minimum classical Coulomb energy
e2 ˜V0 = is subtracted from the Coulomb energy
V0 ˜ra(˜τ) The zeroth-order term for again satisfies the zero-
4πϵr0
ℏ2k2 field and zero-Berry-curvature instanton equation (50) −BMz(k
for convenience. εM(k) = + Q0) is the
2m
whereas the first-order equation is modified to modified single-electron energy due to the orbital magnetic
moment Mz, where is the momentum at the band Q0 ... 2i −iα
(0) ˙˜r(0) δ¨˜r(1) (˜τ)]δ˜r(1) [˜r(0)
˜r −∇∇V E E = . (71)
∼Q0, k bottom. Within a continuum approximation near a a a a a
ν 2
→m∗ m this amounts to renormalizing the effective mass
˜r(0) δ˜r(1) Again, whereas is real, is purely imaginary since
through (16) with a constant shift in energy [29]: a a
the right-hand side of is purely imaginary. On the (71)
≈ℏ2k2 ˜ka
other hand, the zeroth-order term for is purely imagi-
2m∗−Mz(Q0)B. εM(k) (63)
nary and the first-order correction is purely real
−Mz(Q0)B We will drop the constant term as it does not (0)
˜k i˙˜r(0) (˜τ) = (˜τ), (72)
a a affect the spin physics when the band minimum occurs
−α (1)(˜τ)
at a single valley [30]. δ˜k iδ˙˜r(1) [˜r(0)(˜τ)]. E∇V
= (˜τ) (73)
a 2
Since we are interested in the thermodynamic properties
(governed by the imaginary-time dynamics), we consider With the solutions to these equations, the expression for
the Euclidean action SE upon Wick rotation the tunneling action follows straightforwardly from the
procedure analogous the one outlined below (52-54):
ℏ2k2 dri iedri Z
X i −iki· · SE = dτ + 2m∗+ A(ri)
√rs =√rs 2 −α
−1 ˜Sa ˜S(0) ˜Σ(r) ˜Σ(k) dτ dτ
+ i + O r , (74) 2
s a a a i
ν 2
! e2 ≡√rs
1 −idki 1 Z
(0) (0) ˜S, X ˜k d˜k ˜Σ(k) X ·A(ki) −V0
+ (64) ≡ × i,a, (75)
a i,a |ri −rj| dτ 4πϵ 2
i<j i

6
Heisenberg model. To the best of our knowledge, the
phase diagram of this J2-J3-J4-J6 Hamiltonian in the
presence of the Aharonov-Bohm and/or Berry phase (7)
(12) has not been systematically investigated (even with-
J6 J2-J3-J4 out the term). In contrast, the simpler model
B ϕa γa [34– at = Ω= 0 (i.e., = = 0) has been studied in
38]. A further truncation to only and interactions J2 J3
yields a nearest-neighbor Heisenberg model supplemented
by a spin-chirality term, which was studied in [39, 40],
X ≈4 |J2| −|J3| · Heff cos Φ2 cos Φ3 Si Sj
⟨i,j⟩
X −4 |J3| · × sin Φ3 Si Sj Sk + ..., (77)
⟨i,j,k⟩∈△
≡−2 α J(0)
FIG. 1. Magnitude of exchange constants normalized by ˜Σ(r) ˜Σ(k) Φa(ν, α) + . (78)
a
a a J(0) J(0) ν 2
≤rs ≤80. the largest one as a function of 15 is
a 3
˜S(0) ˜A(0) obtained from (4) with and taken from Table I.
a a |Ja| ̸= (4) (17) B Here, is given by [or by when both 0 and
Ω̸= 0]. Interestingly, both the spin-chirality term χijk
and the four-spin term are shown to stabilize hijkl (29)
˜S(0) ˜Σ(r) with and given by and (54). The fluctua- (53)
a a the Kalmeyer-Laughlin chiral spin liquid (CSL) phase
tion determinant similarly acquires only a subdominant
[37, 39, 40]. Since both interactions appear in our effective O(1/√rs)
correction which we ignore. Therefore,
Hamiltonian, the CSL phase could be realized over a
broader region of the parameter space.
−2 α
˜Σ(r) ˜Σ(k) Recently, an extended region of the WC phase has been |Ja(B, Ω)| Ja(B, Ω) = exp i + , (76)
a a ν 2
observed in tetra- and penta-layer rhombohedral graphene
[41], systems suggesting that our considerations may be di-
|Ja(B, Ω)| where the expression for the magnitude is given
rectly relevant to the WC and proximate correlated phases
→m∗ (17) (61) m in and is obtained from by substituting
in this system. More broadly, the present results high-
[see the relevant discussions below (62)].
light that geometric phases manifest in a fundamentally
(B) Discussion—We analyzed how a magnetic field and
different manner in correlated electron crystals compared
a Berry curvature (Ω) modify the magnetism of a Wigner
to weakly interacting systems or Hubbard-type lattice
crystal (WC) through an asymptotic large-rs expansion.
models.
When either or Ωis present individually, the effect is B
Note Added: Upon completion of this work, a preprint
simply to multiply the zero-field and zero-Berry-curvature
[42] appeared that partially overlaps with this work. The
J(0) exchange constant by a phase factor: the Aharonov-
results are largely in agreement where they overlap. a
̸= Bohm phase ϕa(B) for 0 (6-8) and the Berry phase B
Ω̸= γa(Ω) B for 0 (11-13). When both and Ωare present,
in addition to having both phases, the magnitude of the ACKNOWLEDGMENT
exchange constant is also modified due to an effective
mass renormalization originating from the coupling of the I am grateful to Pavel Nosov for insightful discussions
orbital magnetic moment to the magnetic field (15-17). that motivated this investigation, and to Steven A. Kivel-
In the absence of a magnetic field or Berry curvature, son, Liang Fu, Michael Stone, Long Ju, and especially
≳31 the WC is thought to occur for [4], aside from rs
Eduardo Fradkin for valuable discussions. This work also
[16, 31–33]. the subtleties of possible intermediate phases benefited from discussions with participants of the Joint
This critical value of will in general be shifted when rs ICTP-WE Heraeus School and Workshop on Advances
or Ωis finite (as a function of dimensionless parame- B on Quantum Matter, my travel to which was partially
ters and α). Fig. 1 shows the relative magnitudes of ν supported by the US National Science Foundation (NSF)
J(0) J(0) Grant Number 2201516 under the Accelnet program of exchange constants compared to the largest one
a 3
≤rs ≤80. over a physically relevant regime, e.g., 15 In Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE). I
this range, at least four processes (J3, J6) are J2, J4, am supported by the Anthony J. Leggett Postdoctoral Fel-
lowship at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. appreciable, giving rise to a highly frustrated generalized
E. Wigner, On the interaction of electrons in metals, [1] [2] B. Tanatar and D. M. Ceperley, Ground state of the two-
dimensional electron gas, Physical Review B 39, 5005 Physical Review 46, 1002 (1934).

7
(1989). the limit where the Coulomb interaction is the dominant
C. Attaccalite, S. Moroni, P. Gori-Giorgi, and G. B. [3] energy scale and the Landau-level mixing is substantial.
Bachelet, Correlation energy and spin polarization in [19] The existence of the Aharonov-Bohm phase in a magnetic
field was suggested previously in [45, 46]. However, the the 2D electron gas, Physical Review Letters 88, 256601
(2002). [46] theoretical analysis in did not consider a complexified
path integral needed to obtain the correct asymptotic N. Drummond and R. Needs, Phase diagram of the low- [4]
expression of the exchange constants. In our approach, density two-dimensional homogeneous electron gas, Phys-
the tunneling trajectory is determined by solving the ical Review Letters 102, 126402 (2009).
There is an ongoing debate on the intermediate phases complex instanton equations of motion and (42). [5] (41)
of the 2DEG, with various proposals ranging from (1) As a result, while the leading-order expression (i.e., the
[46] “microemulsion” phases where mesoscale WC and FL re- phase factor) in coincides with ours, their subleading
gions form bubbles and/or stripes [31, 32, 43] to (2) the corrections are not valid.
[20] f metallic electron crystal phase where itinerant defects of The operators in the first line are ‘normal-ordered’ such
· · · that electrons with spins are annihilated the WC form a metallic state [16, 33]. σ1, σ2, , σna
in order and then created in a reverse order. For a more [6] M. S. Hossain, M. Ma, K. V. Rosales, Y. Chung, L. Pfeiffer,
detailed discussion, see relevant discussions, e.g., in [47, K. West, K. Baldwin, and M. Shayegan, Observation of
48]. spontaneous ferromagnetism in a two-dimensional electron
Here, the tilde denotes that the left-hand side is asymp- [21] system, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
≪ 117, 32244 (2020). 1/EDebye totically equivalent to the right-hand side for
≪1/|Ja|. K.-S. Kim and S. A. Kivelson, Discovery of an insulat- [7] ∆τ
ing ferromagnetic phase of electrons in two dimensions, As usual, it is assumed that a uniform neutralizing [22]
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, positively-charged background is present, which cancels
e2023964118 (2021). the diverging contribution in (36).
3He D. Thouless, Exchange in solid and the Heisenberg [8] [23] S. Coleman, Aspects of symmetry: selected Erice lectures,
Hamiltonian, Proceedings of the Physical Society (1958- Cambridge University Press (1988).
1967) 86, 893 (1965). [24] J. Zinn-Justin, Quantum field theory and critical phenom-
[9] ena, Oxford University Press (2021). M. Roger, J. Hetherington, and J. Delrieu, Magnetism in
3He, solid Reviews of Modern Physics 55, 1 (1983). [25] Summing over multi-instanton configurations with distinct
3He ≫ M. Roger, Multiple exchange in and in the Wigner instanton events in the zero-temperature limit [β [10] a
1/|Ja|, as opposed to the intermediate time scale (30)] solid, Physical Review B 30, 6432 (1984).
˜β S. Chakravarty, S. Kivelson, C. Nayak, and K. Voelker, [11] requires one to first divide = into slices, βEDebye M
˜β Wigner glass, spin liquids and the metal-insulator transi- ≡∆˜τ/EDebye = M∆˜τ, where ∆τ satisfies (30), and
tion, Philosophical Magazine B 79, 859 (1999). →∞limit. then take For a more detailed treatment M
K. Voelker and S. Chakravarty, Multiparticle ring ex- [12] of this subtle derivation, we refer the readers to [12].
change in the Wigner glass and its possible relevance to D. Xiao, M.-C. Chang, and Q. Niu, Berry phase effects [26]
strongly interacting two-dimensional electron systems in on electronic properties, Reviews of Modern Physics 82,
the presence of disorder, Physical Review B 64, 235125 1959 (2010).
(2001). [27] M.-C. Chang and Q. Niu, Berry phase, hyperorbits, and
[13] M. Katano and D. S. Hirashima, Multiple-spin exchange the hofstadter spectrum: Semiclassical dynamics in mag-
in a two-dimensional Wigner crystal, Physical Review B netic bloch bands, Physical Review B 53, 7010 (1996).
62, 2573 (2000). In order to faithfully capture the Berry curvature ef- [28]
K.-S. Kim, C. Murthy, A. Pandey, and S. A. Kivelson, [14] fect within the Hamiltonian approach (instead of the
Interstitial-induced ferromagnetism in a two-dimensional Lagrangian approach), one needs to include at least two
Wigner crystal, Physical Review Letters 129, 227202 [49, 50]. bands as in This is not necessary for our purpose
(2022). as we work with the effective continuum theory within
B. Bernu, L. Cˆandido, and D. M. Ceperley, Exchange [15] the effective mass approximation.
Frequencies in the 2D Wigner Crystal, Physical Review [29] The details of how the effective mass renormalizes depend
Letters 86, 870 (2001). on the parent band structure and are not explored here.
K.-S. Kim, I. Esterlis, C. Murthy, and S. A. Kivelson, [16] m∗(or We treat Mz) as a given parameter in this work.
Dynamical defects in a two-dimensional Wigner crystal: When there are multiple valleys with different orbital [30]
self-doping and kinetic magnetism, Physical Review B −Mz(k)B magnetic moments, acts as a Zeeman-like term
109, 235130 (2024). for valley degrees of freedom and must be included. Re-
The uniformity is the Berry curvature is justified in the [17] latedly, a trigonal warping correction to the otherwise
dilute filling of such a parent band within the effective p2/2m isotropic dispersion is shown to lead to a valley
mass approximation. polarization of the WC even without this Zeeman-like
(ν√rs)−1
[18] Our main results are perturbative in and there- coupling of the orbital magnetic moment to the magnetic
fore break down once the magnetic field becomes so strong field [51].
ν√rs
≲1. ≪1 ≪1, νrs ν that In contrast, when and the
R. Jamei, S. Kivelson, and B. Spivak, Universal aspects [31]
system is effectively at a dilute filling of the lowest Landau of Coulomb-frustrated phase separation, Physical Review
level (LLL), with the Coulomb interaction projected to Letters 94, 056805 (2005).
the LLL. In this case, a different semi-classical expansion B. Spivak and S. A. Kivelson, Transport in two dimen- [32]
is possible by using as a small expansion parameter ν sional electronic micro-emulsions, Annals of Physics 321,
[44]. We also note that here should not be interpreted ν 2071 (2006).
literally as a Landau-level filling factor, since we work in

8
tum anomalous Hall states in graphene/hBN moir´e su- [33] H. Falakshahi and X. Waintal, Hybrid phase at the quan-
perlattices, Nature 637, 1090 (2025). tum melting of the Wigner crystal, Physical Review Let-
S. Joy, L. Levitov, and B. Skinner, Chiral wigner crys- ters 94, 046801 (2005). [42]
tal phases induced by berry curvature, arXiv preprint K. Kubo and T. Momoi, Ground state of a spin system [34]
arXiv:2507.22121 (2025). with two-and four-spin exchange interactions on the trian-
J. Sung, J. Wang, I. Esterlis, P. A. Volkov, G. Scuri, [43] gular lattice, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik B Condensed Matter
Y. Zhou, E. Brutschea, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, 103, 485 (1997).
T. Momoi, K. Kubo, and K. Niki, Possible chiral phase [35] et al., Y. Yang, An electronic microemulsion phase emerg-
3He, ing from a quantum crystal-to-liquid transition, Nature transition in two-dimensional solid Physical review
letters 79, 2081 (1997). Physics (2025).
O. I. Motrunich, Variational study of triangular lattice J. Jain and S. Kivelson, Model tunneling problems in a [36] [44]
1 spin- model with ring exchanges and spin liquid state high magnetic field, Physical Review B 37, 4111 (1988).
2
in κ-(ET)2Cu2(CN)3, Physical Review B—Condensed [45] T. Okamoto and S. Kawaji, Magnetism in a Wigner solid
and the Aharonov-Bohm effect: Experiment and theory, Matter and Materials Physics 72, 045105 (2005).
T. Cookmeyer, J. Motruk, and J. E. Moore, Four-spin [37] Physical Review B 57, 9097 (1998).
D. Hirashima and K. Kubo, Multiple-spin exchange in [46] terms and the origin of the chiral spin liquid in mott insu-
a two-dimensional Wigner crystal in a magnetic field, lators on the triangular lattice, Physical Review Letters
127, 087201 (2021). Physical Review B 63, 125340 (2001).
K.-S. Kim and V. Elser, Itinerant Ferromagnetism G. Misguich, C. Lhuillier, B. Bernu, and C. Waldtmann, [38] [47]
from One-Dimensional Mobility, arXiv preprint Spin-liquid phase of the multiple-spin exchange hamilto-
arXiv:2412.03638 (2024). nian on the triangular lattice, Physical Review B 60, 1064
J. J. Sakurai and J. Napolitano, Modern quantum me- (1999). [48]
A. Wietek and A. M. L¨auchli, Chiral spin liquid and [39] chanics, Cambridge University Press (2020).
1 T. Tan and T. Devakul, Parent Berry curvature and S [49] quantum criticality in extended = Heisenberg models
2
on the triangular lattice, Physical Review B 95, 035141 the ideal anomalous Hall crystal, Physical Review X 14,
(2017). 041040 (2024).
T. Soejima, J. Dong, A. Vishwanath, and D. E. Parker, [40] [50] S.-S. Gong, W. Zhu, J.-X. Zhu, D. N. Sheng, and K. Yang,
Global phase diagram and quantum spin liquids in a A Jellium Model for the Anomalous Hall Crystal, arXiv
1 preprint arXiv:2503.12704 (2025). spin- triangular antiferromagnet, Physical Review B 96,
2
V. Calvera, S. A. Kivelson, and E. Berg, Pseudo-spin 075116 (2017). [51]
order of Wigner crystals in multi-valley electron gases, [41] Z. Lu, T. Han, Y. Yao, Z. Hadjri, J. Yang, J. Seo, L. Shi,
et al., Low Temperature Physics 49, 679 (2023). S. Ye, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Extended quan-